4221 improvements to dedicated docs (#4249)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: sites/platform/src/dedicated-environments/dedicated-gen-3/overview.md

---
title: "Dedicated Gen 3 Overview"
weight: -10
sidebarTitle: "DG3 overview"
description:  "Designed to cater to the needs of organizations that build demanding apps, Dedicated Generation 3 (DG3) offers increased resources and high availability (HA) for all your services, along with stricter isolation requirements and additional compliance frameworks."
---

{{% description %}}

### Key features

-   **High Availability:** 99.99% SLA (service-level agreement)
-   **Dedicated hosts:** Each DG3 cluster is provisioned with 3 dedicated hosts as the typical configuration

> -   **Headless e-commerce:** Seamless headless e-commerce with multi-app support

Author: Which bullet point are you referring to in particular please @chadwcarlson ?

{{< note title="Note" theme="info" >}}

Existing Grid and Dedicated Gen 2 projects cannot be migrated to Dedicated Gen 3 at this time.

{{< /note >}} 

### Dedicated Gen 3 vs Grid

Much of the tooling used on Grid regions is used for DG3, but there are still some key differences. Please find a list of the similarities and differences below: 

| Feature | DG3 | Grid  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Source Operations** | Yes | Yes |
| **PHP version upgrade** | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **NodeJS version upgrade** | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Cron management** | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Web server internal config : locations**  | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **CDN** | Fastly  | Fastly  |
| **Dedicated IP** | Yes | No |
| **Configuration management** | Split responsibility between Platform.sh and customer | only through yaml files  |
| **Usable regions** | Any region needed | Only the publicly available |
| **Autonomous upsize** | Managed through Platform.sh | Yes |

> | **Upsize or downsize methods** | No downtime - each instance is upsize in a rolling fashion | Redeploy - possible downtime depending on the hooks |

Author: Altered works!

| **Redis Replication**  | Yes: 3 services nodes cluster | None: standalone service container |
| **High availability (HA)**  | Yes | No |
| **Split Architecture** | No | No |
| **Automated backup** | Yes | Yes |
| **Elasticsearch premium**  | Yes | Yes |
| **SFTP password access** | Yes | No |
| **Custom domains name** | On master + any other branches | On master + any other branches |

#### Available services

Your app can connect to each service by referencing the exact same [environment variables](https://docs.platform.sh/development/variables.html) as for Grid environments. 

| Service | Supported versions |
| --- | --- |
| **Headless Chrome** | 95 |
| **MariaDB/MySQL** | 10.11 Galera, 10.6 Galera, 10.5 Galera, 10.4 Galera, 10.3 Galera |
| **Network Storage** | 2 |
| **OpenSearch** | 2 |
| **PostgreSQL** | 16, 15, 14, 13, 12 |
| **RabbitMQ** | 3.13, 3.12 |
| **Redis** | 7.2, 7.0, 6.2 |
| **Ruby** | 3.3, 3.2, 3.1, 3.0 |
| **Solr** | 9.6, 9.4, 9.2, 9.1, 8.11 |
| **Vault KMS** | 1.12 |

See the [services documentation](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services.html) for service-specific details.

#### Local mounts 

> Dedicated Gen 3 provides a redundant infrastructure and local mounts aren’t shared between the three hosts.If you need a folder to be shared between your hosts, set up a [network storage mount](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services/network-storage.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dedicated Gen 3 provides a redundant infrastructure and local mounts aren’t shared between the three hosts. If you need a folder to be shared between your hosts, set up a [network storage mount](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services/network-storage.html).
```

| **NodeJS version upgrade** | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Cron management** | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Web server internal config : locations**  | Self-service via yaml config files | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **CDN** | Fastly  | Fastly  |
| **Dedicated IP** | Yes | Yes |
| **Usable regions** | Any region needed | Any region needed  |
| **Autonomous upsize** | Managed through Platform.sh | Managed through Platform.sh|
| **Multi AZ** | Yes | Yes |
| **New Relic** | APM + New Relic infrastructure | APM + New Relic infrastructure |
| **Multi-app support (PWA)** | Supported through docroots | Supported natively |
| **Routes management**  | Managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Environment clone** | Only on development environments | Yes on all branches |
| **Services : Add, remove, upgrade**  | Managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Relationships : Add, remove, update** | Managed by Platform.sh| Self-service via yaml config files |

> | **Mounts management** | - Autonomous or managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Mounts management** | Autonomous or managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |
```

| **Workers management** | Managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Web server internal config: domains** | Managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |
| **Storage allocation between mounts, DB and services** | Managed by Platform.sh | Self-service via yaml config files |

> | **Storage increase responsibility** | PSH | Autonomous |

Reviewer: "PSH" is an internal acronym, and I assume we mean that store requires a support ticket. For consistency with the rest of the table, should this be changed to "Managed by Platform.sh"?

| **Cron tasks interrupted by deploys** | Yes: a deploy will terminate a running cron task | No: a running cron task will block a deployment until it is complete |
| **Sync and Merge functionalities** | Only on dev environments | Yes on all branches |
| **Functioning** | 3 nodes are running all applications and services are replicated | 3 nodes are running all applications and service are replicated |
| **Resources allocation** | Resources deployed on the 3 nodes | Resources deployed on the 3 nodes |
| **MySQL Replication** | Yes: 3 services nodes cluster | Yes: 3 services nodes cluster |
| **Redis Replication**  | Yes: 3 services nodes cluster | Yes: 3 services nodes cluster |
| **Split Architecture** | Yes | No |
| **VPN** | AWS PrivateLink | AWS PrivateLink |
| **Automated backup** | Yes | Yes  |
| **Elasticsearch premium**  | Yes | Yes |
| **SFTP password access** | Yes | Yes |

> | **Custom domains name** | Supported on the production environment | On master + any other branches |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Custom domains name** | Supported on the production environment | On production + any other branches |
```

| **On-demand backup** | Not supported | Same as grid |

#### Optional features

> You can enable the following features on your Dedicated Gen 3 projects. To enable an optional feature or get more information on potential fees, [contact Sales](https://platform.sh/contact/).

Author: Thanks Chad! Changed it so the ones below were made to be a subsection of that section with #####.

#### Multiple availability zones 

The default configuration for Dedicated clusters is to launch them into a single availability zone (AZ) for the following reasons:

-   The members of your cluster communicate with each other via TCP to perform DB replication, cache lookup, and other associated tasks. Therefore, the latency between data centers or AZs can become a significant performance liability. When your entire cluster is deployed within a single AZ, the latency between cluster members is minimal. This has a direct effect on perceived end-user performance.

> -   Network traffic between AZs is billed, whereas intra-AZ traffic isn’t. So launching Dedicated clusters across multiple AZs leads to higher costs for decreased performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Network traffic between AZs is billed, whereas intra-AZ traffic isn’t. Launching Dedicated clusters across multiple AZs leads to higher costs and decreased performance.
```

If you prefer the peace of mind of hosting across multiple AZs, you can request a different configuration.

> **Note:** Platform.sh is responsible for meeting the 99.99% uptime SLA, so multiple-AZ deployments should only be considered in cases where they’re truly appropriate. Multi-AZ deployments are available only on select AWS regions.

Reviewer: place this in a note shortcode?
